---
title: "N² position statement on the draft bill to amend the Act on Fixed Term Employment Contracts in Academia (WissZeitVG)"
date: 2023-07-03
categories: 
  - "general"
---

_send by BMBF on 14.06.2023_

We, N2, the network of networks, the representatives of the doctoral researchers of the three non-university research institutions, the Helmholtz Association, the Max Planck Society and the Leibniz Association, welcome the efforts of the BMBF to create better conditions for researchers and academics with the presented draft for a new version of the German fixed term contract WissZeitVG.

Indispensable for this is the incorporation of the experience of scientific personnel at all career levels. Their diverse backgrounds must also be sufficiently taken into account. Therefore, we present our statement in both German and English, and would welcome this approach from all parties involved in the discourse around WissZeitVG.

The present draft bill already contains some promising changes. We welcome the introduction of minimum terms for initial contracts allowing for longer-term planning at the beginning of each phase. The expansion of the compensation for disadvantages and the consideration of care can create windows of flexibility in these vulnerable areas and benefit diversity in science. All of these steps contribute to a better work environment and safety and would make Germany more attractive for (international) researchers.

However, we feel like a wide range of problems that have been addressed in the evaluation of the WissZeitVG and extensively discussed with several stakeholders, including us, still remain unanswered. In alliance with initially ten organizations and now many more supporters, we have already formulated a statement with clear demands for an amendment of the WissZeitVG[1]. We would like to underline that the following points need to be reconsidered and enter the reformed act:

- **Standard duration of six years, and a minimum of four years for doctoral contracts!** While three years minimum contract duration is already an improvement, this does not yet correspond to the actual duration required for the successful completion of a doctorate, shown by several surveys like the BuWiN and the harmonized N2 survey 2021. With a minimum term of the initial contract of four years and a standard term of six years, the law would better reflect reality.
- **Narrowing down the concept of qualification to the doctorate!** In the existing version of the WissZeitVG, the concept of qualification is not a legally secure formulation (shown for example by the BAG verdict on the 02.02.2022). The present draft does not make any changes to this, and will thus not make it possible to guarantee legally secure fixed term employment for both doctoral researcher and postdocs in the future either. Thus, the practice of using the WissZeitVG to employ scientists on fixed-term contracts with vague qualification goals to fulfill permanent tasks, including doctoral researchers who have to work on tasks not related to their thesis, will continue. Only a narrowing of the concept of qualification to the doctorate and clearly defined qualification goals and contract requirements for doctoral candidates can change this.
- **Long periods of fixed term contracts for postdocs need to stop!** With the doctorate, the ability for fully independent work in academia is not always well-established. Also, different disciplines have very different requirements to achieve this. Therefore, we understand the motivation of the BMBF to design the postdoc phase with four years on a fixed term employment and additional two years, in case of a permanency assurance, which allows for example for a habilitation. Nevertheless, we must point out that the reform of the WissZeitVG cannot allow existing practices to continue, but must bring about an improvement. First and foremost, a long period of short term chain contracts and the first permanent position at an age over 40 years[2] hinders secure career and famliy planning. Also, not every scientific career has to end and can end in a professorship, and this goal does not have to be achieved exclusively by fixed-term positions. While the minimum contract period of two years serves the purpose of orientation, longer fixed-term periods without binding and comprehensible commitments run the risk of enabling abuse of postdocs for handling permanent tasks and hinder their career progress. Particularly with regard to the attractiveness of science compared to the non-academic labor market, this sends a devastating signal and damages the aspiration to be able to compete internationally.
- **Complete lifting of the tariff ban!** The separation of science from the rest of the labor market due to the partial continuation of the tariff ban represents an incomprehensible special position. The suggested partial removal only harms the employees’ side by reducing the minimum duration of contracts and does not allow for establishing transparent career progress goals or even extension criteria. Without the ability to negotiate on key factors, working conditions will worsen and make working in science and higher education unattractive and eventually drive brilliant minds out of academia or Germany.
- **Full compensation for all disadvantages**! Despite the improvements in the draft bill, the family and social policy components have not yet been expanded far enough. The inclusion of a care component is highly appreciated and will be of great importance in an increasingly aging society. However, compensations must apply to all employees under the WissZeitVG without exception. Not only those with a qualification reasoned fixed-term, but also those with third party funded fixed term employment, in particular if used to exceed the qualification time limit, need to benefit from these compensations. This is crucial in order to meet the special challenges of this particularly challenged group of employees.
- **Demands of student employee representatives need to be met!** The increase of the fixed term for student employees (SHK) from six to eight years and the introduction of minimum contract terms of one year are already a big step in the right direction. Nevertheless, they do not yet meet the demands of the representatives of student employees and we advise to continue to seek dialogue with them in order to do justice to another strongly underrepresented group in the discussions.

An amendment of the WissZeitVG alone cannot renew the location of science (Wissenschaftsstandort Deutschland). The creation of permanent positions must now be included in the negotiation of funds. Further efforts must also be made to improve working conditions in science. These include the fair remuneration of doctoral researchers who still work in part-time employment and are not compensated for the additional work needed to fulfill the scope of their tasks. In order to be competitive and to not further aggravate the shortage of qualified workers, this must change. The practice of scholarships must also be questioned in order to counteract inequality.

Only through a determined joint effort from all sides can we continue to sustainably develop Germany as an attractive research location in the coming years and attract future generations to science, starting with today's doctoral researchers.

[1] https://blogs.helmholtz.de/hejus/2023/03/fuer-eine-umfassende-reform-des-wissenschaftszeitvertragsgesetzes/

[2] BuWiN 2021: 41.7 years for W2, 43.2 years for W3
